docs: k8s job hook proposal (#2901)
treeverse/lakeFS: design/k8s-job-hook.md

# Kubernetes Job Hook Proposal

## Goals

- Enable hooks that trigger execution of some behavior directly by the lakeFS server using Kubernetes
- Enable non-blocking execution for post-merge and post-merge
- Support successful job completion as condition for the commit and merge operations

## Non Goals

- GitHub Actions - fully maintained, virtualized environment with pre-build images to execute pre/post hooks

## Proposition

### Overview

> New lakeFS hook type, triggered by pre/post commit/merge events to execute jobs on k8s cluster.

Reviewer: Please link to our docs page describing Actions & Hooks.

Reviewer: It should clear that understanding what we have today is a prerequisite to reading this documentation.

The user will provide a hook definition that will include the name of the image (docker image) and arguments that will be used for the hook.
While commit/merge occurs, lakeFS will request to execute the job definition on the cluster and wait (optional) for success in order to complete the operation.

### New hook definition

Based on the current actions mechanism, the user will need to write a yaml file and upload it into the repository `_lakefs_actions` folder.

Example of an action using the new hook definition:

```yaml
name: Branch version tagger
description: set version tag on each merge to main
on:
  post-merge:
    branches:
      - main
hooks:
  - id: update_tag
    type: k8s-job
    description: Create a tag based on last version
    properties:
      image: "registry/lakefs-hooks:4"
      command: ["python"]
      args: ["bump-version.py"]
      env:
      - name: REPOSITORY
        value: customers
      - name: PROJECT
        value: alpha
```

> In this example we specified a post merge hook to execute a job. The job will use the image `next/lakefs-hooks:4` with the command python with the argument `bump-version.py`.

Reviewer: It should be super clear that:
1. `registry/lakefs-hooks:4` is defined and managed by the user. The name is misleading and may suggest we maintain it.
2. Same goes to `bump-version.py`.

Author: 1. Update to 'myregistry/myhook:4' and removed any NEXT from the paragraph.
2. Added that his is a user-supplied image.
3. The bump version is related to next - but it is a valid use-case we can describe.

LAKEFS_HOOK_EVENTTIME - Time of the event that triggered
LAKEFS_HOOK_ACTIONNAME - Containing Hook Action's name
LAKEFS_HOOK_HOOKID - ID of the hook
LAKEFS_HOOK_REPOSITORYID - ID of the repository
LAKEFS_HOOK_BRANCHID - ID of the branch
LAKEFS_HOOK_SOURCEREF - Reference to the source that triggered the event
LAKEFS_HOOK_COMMITMESSAGE - The message for the commit
LAKEFS_HOOK_COMMITTER - Name of the committer
LAKEFS_HOOK_COMMIT_METADATA - Commit metadata (json serialized string)
```

By default lakeFS will use the following as base definition to schedule a job:

```yaml
apiVersion: batch/v1
kind: Job
metadata:
  name: ""
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      restartPolicy: Never
      containers:
      - name: hook
        image: ""
        command: []
        args: []
```

Note that the metadata.name, image, command and args will be set by lakeFS.
Name - unique identifier to identify the specific job execution
Image, command and args - set based on the hook information
In case we would like to set a different job specification, we can specify in the lakeFS configuration (lakefs.yaml):

```yaml
hooks:
  k8s-job:
    spec_files:
      default: /etc/lakefs/job_spec.yaml

> ```

Reviewer: Is this a requirement? It's something we can add later on, but I think it shouldn't be part of the first version.

Following an example of a `job_spec.yaml`:

```yaml
apiVersion: batch/v1
kind: Job
metadata:
  name: ""
  namespace: lakefs-hooks
  labels:
    app.kubernetes.io/name: post-merge-hook
    app.kubernetes.io/version: "1.0.0"
spec:
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/name: post-merge-hook
        app.kubernetes.io/version: "1.0.0"
    spec:
      restartPolicy: Never
      containers:
        - name: hook
          image: ""
          command: []
          args: []
          env:
            - name: SPECIAL_ENV
              value: special_value
          resources:
            limits:
              cpu: "2"
              memory: 4G
            requests:
              cpu: "1"
              memory: 2G
```

> We can mount the job spec using a configmap having lakeFS use it as the base to the job template used for all k8s-job hooks.

Reviewer: Can you please rephrase? I don't understand this line.

Author: updated

*Limit the end-user image use*

> Using the lakeFS configuration, we can specify a list of allowed images that the end-user and use in the k8s-job hook:

Reviewer: Again, not sure this is needed. But if you decide to keep this, let's start by explaining the problem: You don't want to allow lakeFS to run any image, therefore you can limit it with this configuration.

Author: We should enable a way to run different types of images.
If we do not enable to specify it in the action - we will need to support multiple specs.
Because  spec files are part of the lakeFS configuration, it means we will need to redeploy.

Reviewer 2: This is not a good way of handling user permissions.  E.g. it is very easy to break out of many images.

But I don't think we need to do this!  lakeFS can just specify what K8s role to use for the job.  The K8s admin can specify what that role is allowed to do.

```yaml
hooks:
  k8s-job:
    allowed_images:
      - rclone/rclone:1.57
      - alpine
```

Each item list will match the `registry/name:tag` used in the hook.
If the tag is omitted, any tag will be allowed.

### Execution

lakeFS requests job creation from the cluster.  In case the request fails it will log the job information and fail the hook execution.
By default the hook waits for the job execution to complete, and based on the job status consider the execution to be successful.
It will capture the job output into the step output.
In case we would not like to block the operation (merge/commit) until the job execution is completed, for example on post-* events. We can change the default behavior by setting wait_for_complete to false:

```yaml
properties:
  wait_for_complete: false

> ```

Reviewer: `post-*` events are by default non-blocking. They can't block something that already happen. `Blocking` here simply means postponing the response to the client for something that already available to others.

Author: reduced the proposal - will not include blocking capability

Without waiting for the job to complete, lakeFS will consider job creation as successful execution. Will log the job information without waiting for the job to complete or capturing the output.

> ### Considerations

Reviewer: Missing: The additional permissions lakeFS needs for managing jobs in k8s (consider both inside and outside the cluster, in terms of authentication as well)

Author: added, thanks

# Kubernetes Job Hook Proposal

## Goals

- Allow lakeFS actions directly to trigger actions running on Kubernetes

> - Enable non-blocking execution for post-merge and post-merge

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Enable non-blocking execution for post-commit and post-merge
```

Without waiting for response, the side-car will response as soon as the cluster create job completes.

Using the current actions mechanism, the user will create and upload a yaml file, into the repository's `_lakefs_actions` folder.

Example of an action using the new hook definition:

```yaml
name: Branch version tagger
description: set version tag on each merge to main
on:
  post-merge:
    branches:
      - main
hooks:
  - id: update_tag
    type: webhook
    description: Create a tag based on last merge
    properties:
      url: "http://localhost:8008/job"
      query_params:
          image: "myregistry/myhook:4"
          command: ["python"]
          args: ["bump-version.py"]
```

In this example we specified a post merge hook to trigger a job creation in cluster using our sidecar.
The job will use the image `myregistry/myhook:4` with the command `python` using the argument `bump-version.py`.
The following environment variables will be populated by the sidecar based on the event information triggered by the web hook:

```
LAKEFS_HOOK_EVENTTYPE - Type of the event that triggered the action

> LAKEFS_HOOK_EVENTTIME - Time of the event that triggered

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
LAKEFS_HOOK_EVENTTIME - Time of the event that triggered the action
```

# Kubernetes Job Hook Proposal

## Goals

> - Enable hooks that trigger execution of some behavior directly by the lakeFS server using Kubernetes

Reviewer 2: Initially I read this as allowing K8s to trigger execution of some lakeFS behaviour.  I think this phrasing is indeed ambiguous, perhaps this will be better?
```suggestion
- Allow lakeFS actions directly to trigger actions running on Kubernetes
```

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: ServiceAccount
metadata:
  namespace: default
  name: lakefs
---
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: lakefs
rules:
  - apiGroups: [""]
    resources: ["job"]
    verbs: ["get", "create", "watch"]
  - apiGroups: [""]
    resources: ["pod"]
    verbs: ["get"]
  - apiGroups: [""]
    resources: ["job/logs"]
    verbs: ["get", "list", "watch"]
---
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRoleBinding
metadata:
  name: lakefs
subjects:
  - kind: ServiceAccount
    namespace: default
    name: lakefs
    apiGroup: ""
roleRef:
  kind: ClusterRole
  name: lakefs
  apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
```

### Considerations

*Job lifetime*

Once a job is created and executed in the cluster, the lakeFS server will not take ownership of the object. A mechanism should be in place to clean up all jobs lakeFS applied and completed (successfully or not).
[Automatic Clean-up for Finished Jobs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/ttlafterfinished/) capability is currently found on Kubernetes 1.23 (which we don’t have yet on AWS for example) which can help with that.

*Job security*

> A user-supplied image can be run within the scope specified in the job spec, but lakeFS has no control over the job and the code itself, except for the image name that is limited by the lakeFS configuration.

Reviewer 2: As above -- I would not regard whitelisting images a usable security mechanism in most environments.  Instead, we should hook into the existing K8s permissions structure, and just request a configurable role to run the job.

Author: Rewrote this section, but I didn't removed the whitelist part yet because I didn't find any solution inside the cluster to limit the execution.

Current hooks mechanism described [here](https://docs.lakefs.io/setup/hooks.html)

Enabling additional side-car deployment will enable the current web-hook to trigger, using a side-car a job execution on a Kubernetes cluster.

The user will provide a web-hook definition that will include query parameters with the image and command to execute. The side-car use the posted information to execute a job based on the image and command line parameters supplied in the hook.

> During commit/merge, lakeFS will trigger web-hook that will post the request to the side-car, it will create a job to run in the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During commit/merge, lakeFS will trigger web-hook that will post the request to the side-car, the side-car will create a job to run in the cluster.
```

        args: []
```

Note that the _metadata.name_, _image_, _command_, _args_ nd the environment variables will be set by the sidecar.
Name will include a unique identifier specific to the job execution.

*Limit the end-user image use*

Using a configuration file, we can specify a list of allowed images that the end-user can use. The sidecar will validate and reject any request to execute a job which is not allowed in case the `allowed_images` is populated.

```yaml
allowed_images:
  - rclone/rclone:1.57
  - alpine
```

> Each item list will match the `registry/name:tag` used in the `image` name. If `tag` is omitted, any tag will be allowed.

Reviewer: Care to rephrase? Not clear to me..

Each item list will match the `registry/name:tag` used in the hook.
If the tag is omitted, any tag will be allowed.

### Execution

lakeFS requests job creation from the cluster.  Job information will be captured to the job's log.
In case the request fails it will log the error and fail the hook execution.
lakeFS will consider job creation as successful execution. Will log the job information without waiting for the job to complete or capturing the output.

### Authorizations

Base on the above, lakeFS will require the following permissions:

- `job` get, create and watch
- `pod` get
- `pod/log` get, list, watch

> The following describes possible ClusteRole that enables the above. We can limit the scope to a single namespace using Role.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following describes possible ClusterRole that enables the above. We can limit the scope to a single namespace using Role.
```

> The following describes possible ClusteRole that enables the above. We can limit the scope to a single namespace using Role.

Reviewer: But you used `lakefs-hook` namespace above, so maybe use a role here to be aligned with the above example?
